Iron Man 3 is a 2013 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Iron Man, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed
by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. It is the sequel to Iron Man (2008) and Iron Man 2 (2010), and the seventh film in the Marvel
Cinematic Universe. The film was directed by Shane Black from a screenplay he co-wrote with Drew Pearce, and stars Robert Downey Jr.
as Tony Stark / Iron Man alongside Gwyneth Paltrow, Don Cheadle, Guy Pearce, Rebecca Hall, Stéphanie Szostak, James Badge Dale, Jon Favreau,
and Ben Kingsley. In Iron Man 3, Tony Stark wrestles with the ramifications of the events of The Avengers during a national terrorism campaign
on the United States led by the mysterious Mandarin.

After the release of Iron Man 2 in May 2010, director Favreau chose not to return for a third film. Black was hired to write and direct
the sequel in February 2011, working with Pearce to make the script more character-centric, focus on thriller elements, and use concepts
from Warren Ellis's "Extremis" comic book story arc. The film's supporting cast, including Kingsley, Pearce, and Hall, were brought on
throughout April and May 2012. Filming took place from May 23 to December 17, 2012, primarily at EUE/Screen Gems Studios in Wilmington,
North Carolina. Additional filming took place around North Carolina as well as in Florida, Los Angeles, and China; an extended version
of the film specifically for Chinese audiences was created. Seventeen companies provided the film's visual effects.

Iron Man 3 premiered at the Grand Rex in Paris on April 14, 2013, and released in the United States on May 3, as the first film in
Phase Two of the MCU. It received praise from critics for its performances, visual effects, action sequences, humor, and Brian Tyler's
musical score, while critics and audiences gave a mixed reception to its Mandarin plot twist. The film was a box office success,
grossing over $1.2 billion worldwide making it the second highest-grossing film of 2013 and the sixteenth film to gross over $1 billion.
At the time it also became the fifth highest-grossing film of all time while its opening weekend became the sixth-highest of all time.
The film received Best Visual Effects nominations at the Academy Awards and the BAFTA Awards.

Plot
At a New Year's Eve party in 1999, Tony Stark meets scientist Maya Hansen, the inventor of an experimental regenerative treatment named
Extremis that allows recovery from crippling injuries. Disabled scientist Aldrich Killian offers them a place in his company
Advanced Idea Mechanics, but Stark rejects him. In December 2012, seven months after the battle of New York, Stark is suffering
from post-traumatic stress disorder and is having frequent panic and anxiety attacks due to his experiences during the alien invasion
and subsequent battle. Restless, he has built dozens of new Iron Man suits to cope with his insomnia, creating friction with
his girlfriend Pepper Potts.

A string of bombings claimed by a terrorist known as the Mandarin has left intelligence agencies bewildered by a lack of forensic evidence.
Stark's security chief Happy Hogan is badly injured in one such attack at the TCL Chinese Theatre, prompting Stark to boldly issue
a televised threat to the Mandarin, revealing his home address in the process. The Mandarin sends gunship helicopters to destroy Stark's home.
Hansen, who came to warn Stark, survives the attack with Potts. Stark escapes in an experimental new Iron Man suit, which his
artificial intelligence J.A.R.V.I.S. pilots to rural Tennessee, following a flight plan from Stark's investigation into the Mandarin.
Stark's new armor is not fully functional and lacks sufficient power to return to California, leaving the world to believe him dead.

Stark investigates the remains of a local explosion bearing the hallmarks of a Mandarin attack. He discovers the "bombings" were triggered
by soldiers subjected to Extremis whose bodies explosively rejected the treatment. These explosions were falsely attributed
to a terrorist plot in order to cover up Extremis's flaws. Stark witnesses Extremis first hand when Mandarin agents Savin and Brandt
attack him: Stark kills Brandt and incapacitates Savin. Meanwhile, Killian resurfaces and kidnaps Potts with assistance from Hansen.
American intelligence agencies continue to search for the Mandarin's location, with James Rhodes—the former War Machine,
now re-branded as the Iron Patriot—lured into a trap to steal his Iron-Man-like armor.

Stark traces the Mandarin to Miami and infiltrates his headquarters using improvised weapons. Inside, he discovers the Mandarin is actually
an English actor named Trevor Slattery, who is oblivious to the actions carried out in his image. Killian, who appropriated
Hansen's Extremis research as a cure for his own disability and expanded the program to include injured war veterans, reveals he is
the real Mandarin behind Slattery's cover. After capturing Stark, Killian reveals he has subjected Potts to Extremis in the hope Stark
will help fix Extremis's flaws while trying to save her. Killian kills Hansen when she tries to stop him.

Stark escapes and reunites with Rhodes, discovering that Killian intends to attack President Ellis aboard Air Force One,
using the Iron Patriot armor, controlled by Savin. Stark kills Savin, saving the passengers and crew, but cannot stop Killian
from abducting Ellis and destroying Air Force One. They trace Killian to an impounded damaged oil tanker where Killian intends
to kill Ellis on live television. The Vice President will become a puppet leader, following Killian's orders, in exchange for Extremis to cure
his young daughter's disability. On the platform, Stark works to save Potts, as Rhodes goes after the President. Stark summons his remaining Iron Man suits,
controlled remotely by J.A.R.V.I.S., to provide air support. Rhodes secures the President and takes him to safety, while Stark discovers Potts
has survived the Extremis procedure; before he can save her, a rig collapses around them and she falls to the platform below,
causing Stark to believe her dead. Stark fights Killian, but finds himself cornered. Potts, whose Extremis powers allowed her to survive her fall,
intervenes and kills Killian to save Stark.

Stark orders J.A.R.V.I.S. to remotely destroy all the Iron Man suits as a sign of his devotion to Potts, while the Vice President and Slattery
are arrested. With Stark's help, Potts's Extremis effects are stabilized; and Stark promises to scale back his life as Iron Man,
undergoing surgery to remove the shrapnel near his heart and throwing his obsolete chest arc reactor into the sea. He muses that, even without
the technology, he will always be Iron Man.

Cast
Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man:
A self-described genius, billionaire, playboy, and philanthropist with mechanical suits of armor of his own invention.
Stark now struggles to come to terms with his near-death experience in The Avengers, suffering from anxiety attacks. On making a third Iron Man film,
Downey said, "My sense of it is that we need to leave it all on the field—whatever that means in the end.
You can pick several different points of departure for that." On following up The Avengers, Downey said they "tried to be practical,
in a post-Avengers world. What are his challenges now? What are some limitations that might be placed on him? And what sort of threat would have him,
as usual, ignore those limitations?" Screenwriter Drew Pearce compared Tony to an American James Bond for both being "heroes with a sense of danger to them,
and unpredictab[le]" even if Stark was a "free agent" instead of an authority figure like Bond. He also likened Tony to the protagonists of 1970s films
such as The French Connection, where "the idiosyncrasies of the heroes is what made them exciting."

Gwyneth Paltrow as Virginia "Pepper" Potts:
Stark's girlfriend, longtime associate, and the current CEO of Stark Industries. Paltrow says of her character's relationship to Tony,
"She still adores Tony, but she absolutely gets fed up with him. He gets caught in a feedback loop." Kevin Feige commented on Pepper's role in the film:
"The love triangle in this movie is really between Tony, Pepper and the suits. Tony, Pepper and his obsession with those suits, and the obsession
with technology." Feige also stated the film uses the character to play with the damsel in distress trope, and posits the question,
"Is Pepper in danger or is Pepper the savior?"

Don Cheadle as James "Rhodey" Rhodes / Iron Patriot:
Stark's best friend and the liaison between Stark Industries and the U.S. Air Force in the department of acquisitions. Rhodes operates
the redesigned/upgraded War Machine armor, taking on an American flag-inspired color scheme similar to the Iron Patriot armor from the comics.
Feige said of Rhodes and the armor, "The notion in the movie is that a red, white and blue suit is a bold statement, and it's meant to be.
With Rhodey, he's very much the foil to Tony's eccentricities, and in this one you get to see this and be reminded of the trust and friendship
between them in that great Shane Black buddy-cop fashion." In the film, the president asks Rhodey to take up the moniker "Iron Patriot," and don the red,
white, and blue suit, in order to be the government's "American hero" in response to the events in The Avengers.

Guy Pearce as Aldrich Killian:
The creator of the Extremis virus and the founder and owner of the science and development organization Advanced Idea Mechanics who adopts the mantle
of the Mandarin as his own. Killian develops Extremis to cure his own debilitating disability; in addition to his regenerative healing qualities,
he has superhuman strength and the ability to generate extreme heat. Prolonged exposure to Extremis also grants him the ability to breathe fire.
On taking the role, Pearce said, "I feel a little more experimental in what I'll take on these days, but I still don't know that I would want to play
the superhero myself, since I'm playing a different kind of character in this film ... The main difference was that, when I did The Time Machine,
I was pretty much in all of it, so it was a really grueling experience. Prometheus and Iron Man are really kind of cameo stuff, so the experience
of shooting them ... I mean, on some level, it's tricky because you feel like a bit of an outsider. You don't really live the experience that
you do when you're there all day every day with everybody. But at the same time, it can be more fun sometimes because you're just working
in concentrated spurts." Pearce described his character as a man "who came into this world with a number of physical disabilities.
He's never been able to accept those limitations though and has spent most of his life trying to overcome them in any way he can.
His tenacity and blind determination in fighting for a better life are seen by some as irritating, as he often comes across as obnoxious.
He just won't accept the cards he was dealt, and being as intelligent as he is, has real drive to change and become a different person."
Shane Black specified, "Ultimately we do give you the Mandarin, the real guy, but it's Guy Pearce in the end with the big dragon tattooed on his chest."
He elaborated, "Do they hand me a blank check and say, 'Go break something!' Or, 'Go violate some long-standing comic book treaty that fans
have supported for years?' No, but they'll say: 'Let's break something together.' So it's okay to come up with these crazy things, these far out ideas
and they'll fly. It's just that the Marvel guys have to be in the room."

Rebecca Hall as Maya Hansen:
A geneticist whose work helped Killian create Extremis. Hall said Hansen would be a "strong female character," and described her decision to take the role,
saying, "I decided to do Iron Man 3 because I've never done the 'hurry up and wait' movie before. Even the studio movies I've done have been
small studio movies, or indie films that we made on a wing and a prayer. I love those, but Iron Man is refreshing in a way because it's something
out of my realm of experiences." Hall confirmed her character's role was greatly reduced in the final film, saying, "I signed on to do something
that was a substantial role. She wasn't entirely the villain—there have been several phases of this—but I signed on to do something very different
to what I ended up doing."

Ty Simpkins as Harley Keener:
A child who lives in Rose Hill, Tennessee. He assists Tony Stark when the latter breaks into his garage in order to repair his suit. He later helps
Stark investigate various incidents associated with the Extremis project, and afterwards he is rewarded by Stark with a garage-full of modern
engineering tools and equipment. Simpkins reprises his role as Harley in a cameo in Avengers: Endgame. Simpkins has stated he has a three-picture deal
with Marvel Studios.

Stéphanie Szostak as Ellen Brandt:
A war veteran who becomes an assassin after her exposure to Extremis. Describing Brandt, Szostak says, ". Extremis was a second chance at life.
We talked about what you feel like and I think it almost makes you a fuller version of who you are, all your weakness and your qualities—just
everything gets enhanced. I saw it as very freeing, almost you become your true-self and your fantasy-self all at once."
The writers originally envisioned Brandt as Killian's main henchman, which would return throughout the movie to fight Tony, but eventually that role
was reassigned to Eric Savin.

James Badge Dale as Eric Savin:
Killian's Extremis-powered henchman. Dale stated his character in the film was "loosely based on" the comic version of the character.
According to Dale, "Ben Kingsley is the mouthpiece. Guy Pearce is the brain. I'm the muscle."

Jon Favreau as Happy Hogan:
Tony Stark's former bodyguard and chauffeur who now serves as Stark Industries' head of security department. Favreau, who served as both actor
and director on the previous two Iron Man films, said participating in the new film was "like being a proud grandfather who doesn't have to change
the diapers but gets to play with the baby."

Ben Kingsley as Trevor Slattery:
A British actor whom Killian hired to portray the Mandarin, a terrorist persona in jammed television broadcasts in which he is depicted as the leader
of the international terrorist organization the Ten Rings.[34] Kingsley was filming Ender's Game when he was cast, and said that,
"Quite soon I'll be with everybody and we'll be discussing the look and the feel and the direction of the character. It's very early days yet,
but I'm so thrilled to be on board."On his performance, Kingsley stated: "I wanted a voice that would disconcert a Western audience.
I wanted a voice that would sound far more homegrown and familiar—a familiarity like a teacher's voice or a preacher's voice.
The rhythms and tones of an earnest, almost benign, teacher—trying to educate people for their own good."
The Mandarin was initially set to appear in the first Iron Man film, but he was put off for a sequel as the filmmakers felt that he was
"too ambitious for a first film." On the character, Feige stated, "The Mandarin is Iron Man's most famous foe in the comics mainly because he's been
around the longest. If you look, there's not necessarily a definitive Mandarin storyline in the comics. So it was really about having an idea."
Shane Black explains Ben Kingsley's Mandarin is not Chinese in the film as he is in the comics in order to avoid the Fu Manchu stereotype:
"We're not saying he's Chinese, we're saying he, in fact, draws a cloak around him of Chinese symbols and dragons because it represents
his obsessions with Sun Tzu in various ancient arts of warfare that he studied." The filmmakers also cited Colonel Kurtz from Apocalypse
Now as an influence for the character. The videos where the Mandarin gives historical background to the attacks expressed how it emerged
as the product of "a think tank of people trying to create a modern terrorist." Thus the Mandarin "represents every terrorist in a way,"
from South American insurgency tactics to the videos of Osama bin Laden.

Paul Bettany reprises his role from previous films as J.A.R.V.I.S., Stark's AI system. Ashley Hamilton portrays Taggart, one of the Extremis soldiers.
William Sadler plays President Ellis, (named after Warren Ellis, who wrote the "Extremis" comics arc that primarily influenced the film's story)
and Miguel Ferrer plays Vice President Rodriguez. Adam Pally plays Gary, a cameraman who helps Stark. Shaun Toub reprises his role
as Yinsen from the first Iron Man film in a brief cameo, and Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance as a beauty pageant judge.
Dale Dickey plays Mrs. Davis, mother of an Extremis subject that is framed as a terrorist.
Wang Xueqi briefly plays Dr. Wu in the general release version of the film.
A cut of the film produced for release exclusively in China includes additional scenes featuring Wang and an appearance by Fan Bingbing
as one of his assistants. Mark Ruffalo makes an uncredited cameo appearance, reprising his role as Bruce Banner from The Avengers,
in a post-credits scene. Comedians Bill Maher and Joan Rivers, and Fashion Police co-host George Kotsiopoulos have cameo appearances
as themselves on their respective real-world television programs, as do newscasters Josh Elliott, Megan Henderson, Pat Kiernan, and Thomas Roberts.
