Iron Man 2 is a 2010 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Iron Man. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed
by Paramount Pictures. It is the sequel to Iron Man (2008) and the third film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU).
Directed by Jon Favreau and written by Justin Theroux, the film stars Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man alongside Gwyneth Paltrow,
Don Cheadle, Scarlett Johansson, Sam Rockwell, Mickey Rourke, and Samuel L. Jackson. Six months after Iron Man, Tony Stark resists calls
from the United States government to hand over the Iron Man technology, which is causing his declining health. Meanwhile,
Russian scientist Ivan Vanko uses his own version of the technology to pursue a vendetta against the Stark family.

Following the critical and commercial success of Iron Man in May 2008, Marvel Studios announced and immediately set to work on producing a sequel.
In July, Theroux was hired to write the script and Favreau was signed to return as director. Downey, Paltrow, and Jackson were set to reprise
their roles from Iron Man, while Cheadle was brought in to replace Terrence Howard in the role of James Rhodes. In the early months of 2009,
Rourke (Vanko), Rockwell, and Johansson filled out the supporting cast. Filming took place from April to July 2009, mostly in California
like the first film except for a key sequence in Monaco. Unlike its predecessor, which mixed digital and practical effects,
the sequel primarily relied on computer-generated imagery to create the Iron Man suits.

Iron Man 2 premiered at the El Capitan Theatre on April 26, 2010, and was released in the United States on May 7, as part of Phase One of the MCU.
The film received generally positive reviews for Downey's performance as well as the action sequences, musical score, and visual effects,
but many critics deemed it to be inferior to the first film and criticized the villain and pacing.
The sequel grossed over $623.9 million at the worldwide box office, making it the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2010.
It received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects. A third installment of the series, Iron Man 3, was released on May 3, 2013.

Plot
In Russia, the media covers Tony Stark's disclosure of his identity as Iron Man. Ivan Vanko, whose father, Anton Vanko, has just died,
sees this and begins building a miniature arc reactor similar to Stark's. Six months later, Stark is a superstar and uses his Iron Man suit
for peaceful means, resisting government pressure to sell his designs. He reinstitutes the Stark Expo in Flushing Meadows, New York to continue
his father Howard's legacy.

Later, Stark learns that the palladium core in the arc reactor that keeps him alive and powers the armor is slowly poisoning him,
and he cannot find a substitute. Growing increasingly reckless and despondent about his impending death, and choosing not to tell anyone
about his condition, Stark appoints his personal assistant Pepper Potts as CEO of Stark Industries, and hires Stark employee Natalie Rushman
to replace her as his personal assistant. Stark competes in the Monaco Historic Grand Prix, where he is attacked in the middle of the race by Vanko,
 wielding electrified whips. Stark dons his armor and defeats Vanko, but the suit is severely damaged. Vanko explains his intention was to prove
 to the world that Iron Man is not invincible. Impressed by Vanko's performance, Stark's rival, Justin Hammer, fakes Vanko's death while
 breaking him out of prison and asks him to build a line of armored suits to upstage Stark. During what he believes is his final birthday party,
 Stark gets drunk while wearing the Iron Man suit. Disgusted, Stark's best friend, U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel James Rhodes,
 dons Stark's prototype armor and tries to restrain him. The fight ends in a stalemate, and Rhodes confiscates the armor for the U.S. Air Force.

Nick Fury, director of S.H.I.E.L.D., approaches Stark, revealing that "Rushman" is Agent Natasha Romanoff and that Howard Stark was
a S.H.I.E.L.D. founder whom Fury knew personally. Fury explains that Vanko's father and Stark invented the arc reactor together, but when
Anton tried to sell it, Stark had him deported. The Soviets sent Anton to the Gulag. Fury gives Stark some of his father's old material.
Tony discovers a hidden message in the diorama of the 1974 Stark Expo; it proves to be a diagram of the atomic structure of a new element.
With the aid of his A.I., J.A.R.V.I.S., Stark synthesizes it. When he learns that Vanko is still alive, he places the new element in his arc
reactor and ends his palladium dependency. At the Expo, Hammer unveils Vanko's armored drones, led by Rhodes in a heavily weaponized version
of the prototype armor. Stark arrives to warn Rhodes, but Vanko takes remote control of all the drones and Rhodes' armor and attacks Stark.
Hammer is arrested while Romanoff and Stark's bodyguard Happy Hogan go after Vanko at Hammer's factory. Vanko escapes, but Romanoff returns
control of Rhodes' armor to him. Together, Stark and Rhodes defeat Vanko and his drones. Vanko commits suicide by blowing up his suit,
along with the defeated drones. At a debriefing, Fury informs Stark that because of his difficult personality, S.H.I.E.L.D. intends
to use him only as a consultant. Stark and Rhodes receive medals for their heroism. In a post-credits scene, S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Phil Coulson
reports the discovery of a large hammer at the bottom of a crater in a desert in New Mexico.

Cast
Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man:
A billionaire who escaped captivity in Afghanistan with a suit of armor he created, he now struggles to keep his technology out of
the government's hands. Downey and Favreau, who had been handed a script and worked from it on the first movie, conceived part of
the film's story themselves. On Stark being a hero, Downey said "It's kind of heroic, but really kind of on his own behalf. So I think
there's probably a bit of an imposter complex and no sooner has he said, 'I am Iron Man–' that he's now really wondering what that means.
If you have all this cushion like he does and the public is on your side and you have immense wealth and power, I think he's way too insulated
to be okay." Downey put on 20 pounds of muscle to reprise the role. Six-year-old Davin Ransom portrays Tony Stark as a child.

Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts:
Stark's closest friend, budding love interest, and business partner; Pepper is promoted to CEO of Stark Industries. On her character's promotion,
Paltrow opined "When we start Iron Man 2 Pepper and Tony are very much in the same vibe as the movie progresses,
Pepper is given more responsibility and she's promoted and it's nice to see her sort of grow up in that way.
I think it really suits her, the job fits her really well."[13] Paltrow expressed excitement about working with Johansson.

Don Cheadle as James "Rhodey" Rhodes / War Machine:
An officer in the U.S. Air Force and Tony Stark's close personal friend who later operates the War Machine armor.
Cheadle replaces Terrence Howard from the first film. Cheadle only had a few hours to accept the role and did not even know what
storyline Rhodes would undergo. He commented that he is a comic book fan, but had not previously participated in comics-themed
films due to the scarcity of black superheroes. Cheadle said he thought Iron Man was a robot before the first film came out.
On how he approached his character, Cheadle stated "I go, what's the common denominator here? And the common denominator was really
his friendship with Tony, and that's what we really tried to track in this one. How is their friendship impacted once Tony comes out
and owns 'I am Iron Man'?". Cheadle said his suit was 23 kilograms (50 lb) of metal, and that he could not touch his face while wearing it.
Cheadle signed a six-picture deal.

Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow:
An undercover spy for S.H.I.E.L.D. posing as Stark's new assistant. Johansson dyed her hair red before she landed the part, hoping that
it would help convince Favreau that she was right for the role. On why she chose the role, Johansson said, "the Black Widow character
resonated with me. She is a superhero, but she's also human. She's small, but she's strong. She is dark and has faced death so many times
that she has a deep perspective on the value of life. It's hard not to admire her." She stated that she had "a bit of a freak-out moment"
when she first saw the cat-suit. When asked about fighting in the costume, Johansson responded "a big part of me is like 'can I move in this?
Can I run in it? Can I like throw myself over things with this?' And I think just the prep, you just have to put in the hours.
That's what I realized is that just putting in the hours and doing the training and repetition and basically just befriending the stunt team
and spending all day, every day, just over and over and over and over until you sell it."

Sam Rockwell as Justin Hammer:
A rival weapons manufacturer. Sam Rockwell was considered for the role of Tony Stark in the first film, and he accepted the role of Hammer
without reading the script. He had never heard of the character before he was contacted about the part, and was unaware Hammer is
an old Englishman in the comics. Rockwell said, "I worked with Jon Favreau on this film called Made. And Justin Theroux, who wrote the script,
is an old friend of mine, they sort of cooked up this idea and pitched it to Kevin Feige. What they did, they were maybe going to do one villain
like they did with Jeff Bridges, but then they decided to split the villains. And really Mickey Rourke is the main villain, but I come to his aid.
Rockwell described his character as "plucky comic relief, but he's got a little bit of an edge".

Mickey Rourke as Ivan Vanko / Whiplash:
A Russian physicist and ex-convict who builds a pair of arc reactor-based electric whips to exact vengeance on the Stark family.
The character is an amalgam of Whiplash and Crimson Dynamo. Rourke visited Butyrka prison to research the role, and he suggested half
of the character's dialogue be in Russian. He also suggested the addition of tattoos, gold teeth and a fondness for a pet cockatoo,
paying for the teeth and bird with his own money. Rourke explained that he did not want to play a "one-dimensional bad guy", and wanted
to challenge the audience to see something redeemable in him. Not knowing anything about computers, Rourke described pretending to be
tech-savvy as the hardest part of the role.

Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury:
Director of S.H.I.E.L.D.; Jackson signed a nine-film contract to play the character. On the subject of his character not seeing any action
in the film, Jackson said "We still haven't moved Nick Fury into the bad-ass zone. He's still just kind of a talker."

The director, Jon Favreau, reprises his role as Happy Hogan, Tony Stark's bodyguard and chauffeur, while Clark Gregg and Leslie Bibb
reprise their roles as S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent Phil Coulson and reporter Christine Everhart, respectively.

John Slattery appears as Tony's father Howard Stark and Garry Shandling appears as United States Senator Stern,
who wants Stark to give Iron Man's armor to the government. Favreau stated that Shandling's character was named after radio
personality Howard Stern. Paul Bettany again voices Stark's computer, J.A.R.V.I.S. Olivia Munn originally appeared as an unnamed character
who was subsequently cut from the film.
Favreau then gave her the role of Chess Roberts, a reporter covering the Stark expo.
Yevgeni Lazarev appears as Ivan Vanko's father Anton Vanko, Kate Mara portrays a Process Server who summons Tony to the government hearing,
and Stan Lee appears as himself (but is mistaken for Larry King).

Additionally, news anchor Christiane Amanpour and political commentator Bill O'Reilly play themselves in newscasts.
Adam Goldstein appears as himself and the film is dedicated to his memory.
Further cameos include Tesla Motors CEO Elon Musk and Oracle Corporation CEO Larry Ellison.
Favreau's son Max appears as a child wearing an Iron Man mask whom Stark saves from a drone.
This was retroactively made as the introduction of a young Peter Parker to the MCU, as confirmed in June 2017 by eventual Spider-Man actor
Tom Holland, Feige and Spider-Man: Homecoming director Jon Watts.