Iron Man is a 2008 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed
by Paramount Pictures. It is the first film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. It was directed by Jon Favreau from a screenplay
by the writing teams of Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby, and Art Marcum and Matt Holloway, and stars Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man
alongside Terrence Howard, Jeff Bridges, Shaun Toub, and Gwyneth Paltrow. In the film, following his escape from captivity by a terrorist group,
world famous industrialist and master engineer Tony Stark builds a mechanized suit of armor and becomes the superhero Iron Man.

A film featuring the character was in development at Universal Pictures, 20th Century Fox, and New Line Cinema at various times since 1990,
before Marvel Studios reacquired the rights in 2006. Marvel put the project in production as its first self-financed film,
with Paramount Pictures distributing. Favreau signed on as director in April 2006, and faced opposition from Marvel when trying
to cast Downey in the title role; the actor was signed in September. Filming took place from March to June 2007, primarily in California
to differentiate the film from numerous other superhero stories that are set in New York City-esque environments.
During filming, the actors were free to create their own dialogue because pre-production was focused on the story and action.
Rubber and metal versions of the armor, created by Stan Winston's company, were mixed with computer-generated imagery to create the title character.

Iron Man premiered in Sydney on April 14, 2008, and was released in the United States on May 2, as the first film in Phase One of the MCU.
It grossed over $585 million on its $140 million budget, becoming the eighth-highest grossing film of 2008.
The film was praised by critics for its acting (particularly Downey's), screenplay, direction, visual effects, and action sequences.
It was selected by the American Film Institute as one of the ten best films of 2008 and received two nominations at the 81st Academy Awards
for Best Sound Editing and Best Visual Effects. It was followed by two sequels, Iron Man 2 in 2010 and Iron Man 3 in 2013.

Plot
Tony Stark, who has inherited the defense contractor Stark Industries from his father Howard Stark, is in war-torn Afghanistan with his friend
and military liaison, Lieutenant Colonel James Rhodes, to demonstrate the new "Jericho" missile.
After the demonstration, the convoy is ambushed and Stark is critically wounded by a missile used by the attackers: one of his company's own.
He is captured and imprisoned in a cave by a terrorist group called the Ten Rings. Yinsen, a fellow captive doctor, implants an electromagnet
into Stark's chest to keep the shrapnel shards that wounded him from reaching his heart and killing him. Ten Rings leader Raza offers Stark
freedom in exchange for building a Jericho missile for the group, but he and Yinsen know that Raza will not keep his word.

Stark and Yinsen secretly build a small, powerful electric generator called an arc reactor to power Stark's electromagnet and a prototype suit
of powered armor to aid in their escape. Although they keep the suit hidden almost to completion, the Ten Rings discover their hostages'
intentions and attack the workshop. Yinsen sacrifices himself to divert them while the suit fully charges. The armored Stark battles his way
out of the cave to find the dying Yinsen, then burns the Ten Rings' weapons in anger and flies away, crashing in the desert and destroying the suit.
After being rescued by Rhodes, Stark returns home and announces that his company will cease manufacturing weapons. Obadiah Stane,
his father's old partner and the company's manager, advises Stark that this may ruin Stark Industries and his father's legacy.
In his home workshop, Stark builds a sleeker, more powerful version of his improvised armor suit as well as a more powerful arc reactor for it
and his chest. Personal assistant Pepper Potts places the original reactor inside a small glass showcase. Though Stane requests details,
a suspicious Stark decides to keep his work to himself.

At a charity event held by Stark Industries, reporter Christine Everhart informs Stark that his company's weapons were recently delivered
to the Ten Rings and are being used to attack Yinsen's home village, Gulmira. Stark dons his new armor and flies to Afghanistan,
where he saves the villagers. While flying home, Stark is attacked by two fighter jets. He reveals his secret identity to Rhodes over the phone
in an attempt to end the attack. Meanwhile, the Ten Rings gather the pieces of Stark's prototype suit and meet with Stane,
who has been trafficking arms to criminals worldwide and has staged a coup to replace Stark as Stark Industries' CEO by hiring the Ten Rings
to kill him. He subdues Raza and has the rest of the group killed. Stane has a massive new suit reverse engineered from the wreckage.
Seeking to track his company's illegal shipments, Stark sends Potts to hack into its database. She discovers that Stane hired the Ten Rings
to kill Stark, but the group reneged when they realized they had a direct route to Stark's weapons. Potts meets with Agent Phil Coulson
of S.H.I.E.L.D., an intelligence agency, to inform him of Stane's activities.

Stane's scientists cannot duplicate Stark's miniaturized arc reactor, so Stane ambushes Stark at his home and takes the one from his chest.
Stark manages to get to his original reactor to replace it. Potts and several S.H.I.E.L.D. agents attempt to arrest Stane, but he dons his suit
and attacks them. Stark fights Stane but is outmatched without his new reactor to run his suit at full capacity. The fight carries Stark
and Stane to the top of the Stark Industries building, and Stark instructs Potts to overload the large arc reactor powering the building.
This unleashes a massive electrical surge that causes Stane and his armor to fall into the exploding reactor, killing him. The next day,
at a press conference, Stark defies suggestions from S.H.I.E.L.D. and publicly admits to being "Iron Man."

In a post-credits scene, S.H.I.E.L.D. Director Nick Fury visits Stark at home, telling him that Iron Man is not "the only superhero in the world",
and explaining that he wants to discuss the "Avenger Initiative".

Cast
Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man:
An industrialist, genius inventor, and consummate playboy, he is CEO of Stark Industries and chief weapons manufacturer for the U.S. military.
Director Jon Favreau felt that Downey's past made him an appropriate choice for the part and that the actor could not only make Stark
a "likable asshole," but also portray an authentic emotional journey, once he had won over the audience. Favreau was also attracted
to Downey because of his performance in Kiss Kiss Bang Bang. Downey frequently spoke with that film's director, Shane Black,
about the script and dialogue in Iron Man. Downey had an office next to Favreau during pre-production, which allowed him greater
involvement in the screenwriting process, specially when it came to adding humor to the film.
Downey explained, "What I usually hate about these superhero movies is when suddenly the guy that you were digging turns into Dudley Do-Right,
and then you're supposed to buy into all his 'Let's go do some good!' That Eliot Ness-in-a-cape-type thing. What was really important to me
was to not have him change so much that he's unrecognizable. When someone used to be a schmuck and they're not anymore,
hopefully they still have a sense of humor." To get into shape, Downey spent five days a week weight training and practiced martial arts,
which he said benefited him because "it's hard not to have a personality meltdown after about several hours in that suit.
I'm calling up every therapeutic moment I can think of to just get through the day."

Terrence Howard as James "Rhodey" Rhodes:
A friend of Stark's and the liaison between Stark Industries and the United States Air Force in the department of acquisitions,
specifically weapons development. Favreau cast Howard because he felt he could play War Machine in a sequel.
Howard prepared for the role by visiting Nellis Air Force Base on March 16, 2007, where he ate with the pilots and observed HH-60 Pave Hawk
rescue helicopters and F-22 Raptors. While Rhodes is roguish in the comics after he meets Stark, his previous role as a disciplinarian
creates a dynamic tension with Stark's character. He is unsure whether Stark's actions are acceptable.
"Rhodey is completely disgusted with the way Tony has lived his life, but at a certain point he realizes that perhaps there is a different way,
" Howard said. "Whose life is the right way: Is it the strict military life, or the life of an independent?"
Howard and his father are Iron Man fans, partly because Rhodes was one of the few black superheroes when Howard was a child.
He has been a Downey fan since he saw him in Weird Science; the two competed physically on set.

Jeff Bridges as Obadiah Stane / Iron Monger:
Stark's business second-in-command, mentor, and friend, who turns on him to take over the company, eventually building a giant exosuit
to fight Stark. Bridges read the comics as a boy and liked Favreau's modern, realistic approach. He shaved his head, something he had wanted
to do for some time, and grew a beard for the role. Bridges googled the Book of Obadiah, and was surprised to learn retribution is a major theme
in that book of the Bible, something that Stane represents. Many of Stane's scenes were cut to focus more on Stark, but the writers
felt Bridges's performance allowed the application of "less is more" when editing the film.

Shaun Toub as Ho Yinsen:
Stark's fellow captive, who grafts an electromagnet to Stark's chest "to keep the shrapnel shell shards that wounded him from reaching
his heart and killing him" and helps Stark build the first Iron Man suit.

Gwyneth Paltrow as Virginia "Pepper" Potts:
Stark's personal assistant and budding love interest. Paltrow asked Marvel to send her any comics they would consider relevant to her
understanding of the character, whom she considered to be very smart, levelheaded, and grounded. She said she liked "the fact that
there's a sexuality that's not blatant.” Favreau wanted Potts' and Stark's relationship to be reminiscent of a 1940s comedy,
something which Paltrow considered to be fun in an "innocent yet sexy" way.

Additionally, Faran Tahir appears as Raza, the leader of the Ten Rings;
Paul Bettany voices J.A.R.V.I.S., Stark's personal AI system;
Leslie Bibb portrays Christine Everhart, a reporter for Vanity Fair;
and Clark Gregg appears as Phil Coulson, an agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.
Will Lyman provides the voice-over during the opening award ceremony.
Director Jon Favreau plays Happy Hogan, Stark's bodyguard and chauffeur, and Samuel L. Jackson makes a cameo appearance as Nick Fury,
director of S.H.I.E.L.D., in a post-credits scene. Jackson's face was previously used as the model for the Ultimate Marvel imprint version
of Nick Fury.
Other cameos in the film include Stan Lee as himself, being mistaken for Hugh Hefner by Stark at a party;
Peter Billingsley as William Ginter Riva, a scientist who works for Stane;
Tom Morello, who provided guitar music for the film, as a terrorist guard and Jim Cramer as himself.
Ghostface Killah had a cameo in a scene where Stark briefly stays in Dubai, but the scene was cut from the theatrical release for pacing reasons.
