Minecraft is a sandbox construction video game originally created by Markus Notch Persson. It is maintained by Mojang Studios, a part of Xbox Game Studios,
which in turn is part of Microsoft.
From its creation, Minecraft was developed almost exclusively by Notch until Jens Bergensten started working with him, and has since become head of its development.
It features music by Daniel Rosenfeld and paintings by Kristoffer Zetterstrand. Initially released as what is now known as Minecraft Classic on May 17, 2009,
the game was fully released on November 18, 2011. Since its release, Minecraft has expanded to mobile devices and consoles. On November 6, 2014,
Minecraft and all of Mojang Studios' assets were acquired by Microsoft for US$2.5 billion. Notch has since left Mojang, and is no longer working on Minecraft.

Minecraft focuses on allowing the player to explore, interact with, and modify a dynamically-generated map made of one-cubic-meter-sized blocks.
In addition to blocks, the environment features plants, mobs, and items. Some activities in the game include mining for ore, fighting hostile mobs, and crafting new blocks
and tools by gathering various resources found in the game. The game's open-ended model allows players to create structures, creations, and artwork
on various multiplayer servers or their single-player maps. Other features include redstone circuits for logic computations and remote actions,
minecarts and tracks, and a mysterious underworld called the Nether. A designated but completely optional goal of the game is to travel to a dimension called the End,
and defeat the ender dragon.

Player.
The player is the person that the user controls in the world. When the user starts a game, the player is put in a world, generated by a random or specified seed,
with an empty inventory. If the bonus chest option is enabled, a chest filled with basic items generates near the player.
The player has a health bar with 10 hearts, and can be damaged by falls, suffocation, drowning, fire, lava, lightning, cacti, sweet berry bushes,
falling into the Void, falling anvils and being hit by mobs and other players. Damage to health can be mitigated by armor or Resistance potion and health
can be restored by eating food and drinking specific potions, or if difficulty is set to Peaceful, health regenerates on its own.
Hunger is also a factor if the difficulty is not set to Peaceful, depleting over time and even faster while sprinting, jumping or swimming.
Food replenishes the hunger level, however, eating rotten flesh and raw chicken has a chance of giving the player a hunger effect.
Depending on the difficulty level, a low hunger level depletes a player's health.
A player can change their skin on the profile page of Minecraft.net or in the launcher.

Blocks.
The world of Minecraft takes place within a three-dimensional grid of cubes, with each cube being occupied by a certain type of block (not all of which are necessarily cubic).
here are different types of blocks; natural blocks such as grass, stone, and ores are randomly generated within the world. There are also blocks that players can craft,
such as a crafting table and a furnace. Resources can be extracted from blocks by hand or by using tools. Some of these resources are simply blocks in the player's
inventory that can be placed elsewhere, while others are used as material to create other blocks or tools. Others yield no practical use whatsoever.
Some blocks cannot be broken through normal survival means, e.g. bedrock, end portal frames, command blocks, and barriers.

Mining.
Various ores (in proximity of lava) that can be mined with a pickaxe.
Mining is one of the main aspects of Minecraft and is done to extract ore and other materials mainly from below the surface of the map.
These ores include coal, iron, gold, redstone, diamond, lapis lazuli, and emerald. Mining can involve digging a hole from the surface or going down through a cave.
Mineshafts create extra areas that may contain resources, since they are usually rich in ores.

Crafting and Smelting.
A crafting table, used to create most of the blocks and items in Minecraft.
Crafting allows players to create new tools and blocks using items from their inventory. Subsequent versions often contain crafting recipes for new blocks and items.
To craft, a player can use the 2×2 grid in the inventory or the 3×3 grid provided by a crafting table. Smelting requires a furnace in addition to fuel,
and processes blocks into a more useful form such as iron ores into iron ingots.

Brewing and Enchanting.
An Enchantment Table with glyphs being absorbed into it.
Brewing creates potions from various ingredients and water using a brewing stand. They are stored in a glass bottle and then consumed by the player or thrown
at other mobs to generate a certain effect based on the ingredients used to create the potion. Enchanting is also used to upgrade armor,
tools, or weapons with an enchanting table. More powerful enchantments can be accessed by gaining experience and placing bookshelves around the enchanting table.

Mobs.
A creeper in a forest. Creepers stalk the player and then explode once they get near.
Mobs (short for mobiles) are the animals and other creatures that inhabit the map. Hostile mobs attack the player while passive mobs do not. Neutral mobs attack when provoked.
The Overworld contains many passive mobs that may be killed for food or bred with one another; these include:
Pigs: drop porkchops upon death and can be ridden using a saddle.
Cows: drop beef upon death and can be milked using a bucket.
Sheep: drop mutton and 1 wool upon death and can be shorn to produce 1–3 wool.
Chickens: drop chicken meat and feathers upon death and lay eggs.
Horses: drop leather upon death and can be ridden using a saddle, traveling much faster than pigs.
Bats: ambient mobs that fly around caves.

Common hostile mobs found throughout the Overworld include:
Zombies: attack by melee damage.
Skeletons: have a bow and infinitely many arrows.
Spiders: jump large distances and can climb walls.
Witches: use potions.
Creepers: explode when near the player.
Endermen: tall, black creatures with purple eyes and turn aggressive when the player looks at them.
The Overworld also contains some rarer mobs that spawn only on occasion or in specific biomes:

Spider jockeys: a skeleton riding a spider.
Chicken jockeys: a baby zombie riding a chicken.
Slimes: spawn deep within the map and in swamplands.
Villagers: inhabit villages and can trade with the player.
Parrots: can imitate the sounds of nearby mobs.
Wolves: can be tamed by the player and attack enemy mobs if the player engages or is attacked by them
Mooshrooms: mushroom variants of cows that spawn in mushroom field biomes.
Vindicator: spawn in woodland mansions
Pillager: spawn in pillager outposts
Evoker: spawn in Woodland Mansions

Some mobs can be found exclusively in the Nether, including:
Ghasts: flying mobs that shoot exploding fireballs at the player.
Zombified piglins: wield golden swords and attack in hordes if provoked.
Wither skeletons: tall, black variants of regular skeletons that wield stone swords and drop coal and, occasionally, wither skeleton skulls that
can be used to summon the wither.
Blazes: shoot fireballs at players and hover above the ground.
Magma cubes: similar to Overworld slimes.
The End contains the ender dragon, which is the main boss mob in Minecraft and allows the player to exit back to the Overworld when it dies.
Withers are the second boss mob in Minecraft, and are created by the player by placing wither skeleton skulls on top of soul sand in a specific pattern.
When spawned, they shoot wither skulls at nearby non-undead mobs.

The Nether.
The Nether is a dimension in Minecraft, accessible from the Overworld by a nether portal. It consists of five biomes, those being the Nether Wastes,
the Basalt Deltas, the Crimson and Warped Forests and the Soul Sand Valleys: each biome has unique generation and terrain.
It is populated by zombified piglins, blazes, ghasts, wither skeletons, magma cubes, piglins and hoglins.

The End.
The End is another dimension of the game where the player battles the ender dragon. The End is accessible by entering an end portal found in a stronghold.
The End is composed of end stone and is inhabited by endermen. It also contains tall obsidian pillars on top of which are end crystals that heal the ender dragon.
Once the ender dragon is slain, the exit portal is created in the center of the map, and an end gateway portal is created near an edge of the map,
which transports the player to the expansive outer end islands.

Multiplayer.
Minecraft multiplayer servers have developed to include their own rules and customs, guided by their administrators and moderators.
The term griefer, meaning a player who causes grief, is a typical term on the Internet but has taken up its definition on Minecraft servers: a person who destroys
or defiles other users' creations on servers. Griefers are the reason many server administrators make rules, but this has been taken a step further with modifications
to the Minecraft server and even plugin-based replacement servers such as Bukkit. Because of these plugin-based servers, new user-created features have shown
up in Minecraft. This includes features like money, vehicles, protection, RPG elements and more. These features normally do not require modification to a user's
client and can be accessed by using chat commands. With the default controls, the chat screen is brought up by pressing T.
One popular game on multiplayer servers is Spleef (a play on the word grief), a game where the player aims to make another player drop through the floor
by destroying blocks beneath the opponent's feet. This is typically played in a designated area and is usually run automatically using server plugins.
Many popular multiplayer servers exist that may contain custom minigames or large Survival or Creative worlds.